In this video, I'm going to show you the
only five web design skills that
actually matter. You can usually tell
right away if a site was built by a pro
or by somebody who's still kind of
figuring it out. And it's easy to think
that that takes a ton of different
skills. After 10 years of reading books,
taking courses, and plain old building a
ton of websites, I can actually tell you
there are really just five things you
need to know. By the end of this video,
you're going to know exactly what to
focus on to level up fast and finally
feel confident as a web designer. Are
you ready? Let's go.
First up are your typography skills.
Outside of whites space, text takes up
the most real estate on your website,
but 99% of web designers can't tell the
difference between bad type choices and
good type choices. They might be able to
feel when something's off, but it just
kind of stops there. But here's the good
news. You actually only need to answer
two questions to master typography for
websites. And when you can do that
confidently on every project, you'll be
in the top 1% of web designers. So
question number one is, how do I pick
the right fonts for my project? Most web
designers use the same free fonts over
and over again. And when you use those
same fonts as everyone else, your
designs start to blend in, not stand
out. So, you got to find fonts from
places that aren't overused. Two of my
favorite resources are fontshare.com and
uncut.wtf.
Fontshare is clean, highquality, and
completely free to use, while Uncut is a
bit more experimental. But they're both
packed with personality and tons of free
fonts to use. Oh, and I've got a running
list of free and affordable fonts that I
found out in the wild. Every one of them
are chef's kiss. So, you're going to
find the link to that list in the
description of this video. Oh, and by
the way, make sure that you like and
subscribe so you don't miss another
episode. And if you want the slides that
I use to teach these five skills,
there's a link for those in the
description. Question number two is, how
do you set up your fonts in such a way
that it actually improves your design
and makes your site easier to use? If
you've ever looked at a site that was
designed by a true web pro, you're going
to notice something, right? All the text
feels cohesive yet predictable without
feeling super robotic, like you're kind
of reading a Wikipedia page. That's
because pro designers use something
called a type scale system. And it's
just a simple set of rules that
determines things like font sizes,
letter spacing, and line height. And
once you've set it up, your typography
starts to feel intentional instead of
just eyeballed. Let's start with font
size. What you want to do is pick a base
font size for your paragraph text.
Typically, people start with about 16
pixels. And then you use a scale to make
your headings consistently larger. A
popular one is called the major third
scale. And if you've ever learned an
instrument, this might sound a little
bit familiar. All it means is that
you're actually going to scale up in
size from one text to the next by about
25%. So if your base size is 16, your H6
would be 20 and then your H5 would be
25. So on and so forth until you reach
your H1s. And you actually don't have to
calculate this manually. Instead of
using pixels, just use the rem values.
It does all the calculations right there
for you. Next up is letter spacing. For
for body text, don't touch it, right? We
want that to be super legible and so
just keep it the default. But for
headings, you want to tighten it up a
little bit as they get bigger. As text
gets larger, it often looks cleaner with
slightly reduced spacing. And then
finally, line height. For paragraphs, go
with about 150% of the font size. So if
the font size is 16 pixels, then you
would take that and then multiply it by
1.5 to get your line height. That gives
the text room to breathe and makes it
easier to read. And then as text gets
bigger, like with headings, you can
tighten up the line height a bit to make
it feel a bit more impactful and
scannable. Now, if all that sounds like
a lot, here's a shortcut. Go to
typescale.net. net. You pick your base
size, choose a ratio, and then it just
generates the whole system for you. It
takes two minutes and makes your
typography look like a pro set it up.
Next up is layout. Most new web
designers just kind of drag things
around until it feels right. And hey,
you might even be following some design
rules without realizing, but pro
designers don't guess about where things
should go on the page. They have systems
that guarantee it every time. And you
actually don't need to memorize a ton of
layout rules. You just need three
things. A grid system for structure, a
spacing system for rhythm between
elements, and even vertical spacing, and
then visual hierarchy to guide the eye.
Let's start with the grid. Think of this
as your layout's foundation. I like to
use a 12 column layout on desktop, eight
columns on tablets, and then four
columns on mobile. Why is that? Well,
because it's super flexible to divide
evenly to where you don't have to have
12 columns specifically. It could be two
columns that take up six columns on the
right and six columns on the left. And
then you could make it three or four.
It's just easy to work with. Figma
actually makes this super simple to set
up. All you have to do is select your
frame, come all the way down to layout
guide, add the plus sign, change grid to
columns, and then add the amount of
columns that you're wanting to work
with. Next up is spacing. And this is
what gives your design room to breathe.
I use what's called an eightoint grid
system. And it just means that your
spacing is always multiples of eight,
like 8, 16, 24, 32, so on and so forth.
It's the same approach that's used by
Google for material design and Apple in
in their design systems as well. And if
major players like Google and Apple are
using it, then you know, you can't
ignore it. This is also super easy to
set up. You do the same thing in Figma
as if you were setting up columns, but
then when you add a guide, you just
remain on grid and then change the size
of the grid to whatever you're wanting
to use. The last piece is visual
hierarchy. Because here's the truth,
people don't read websites, they scan
them. So, your layout needs to guide the
eyes from the things that are most
important to things that maybe don't
matter all that much. Here are a few
quick principles to do just that. Use
proximity. So keep related things close
together as if they're in the same space
on a page. Then use size to tell users
what's more important or least
important. You can see that this
website's done a good job with that on
their big text and the big image down
here. Use contrast, right? You can use
size, weight, or color. And you can see
that this website's done that really
well with the opacity of their headers
versus their body text. So, they're
signaling to you that they really want
you to read this and this other stuff
might not be that important. And then
alignment, because clean lines always
equal a clear structure. When you use
those four together, you're going to
build a layout that feels effortless to
navigate. And that's what separates the
pros from the beginners. Next up, let's
talk about color. For a lot of
designers, this is where things start to
feel really overwhelming because there
are millions of colors out there. So,
how do you know what works? Here's the
secret. Pro designers don't use more
color, they use color more
intentionally. Let me show you some
quick wins that are going to instantly
level up your color game. First, you
want to limit your color palette, right?
You don't need more than like two or
three different colors for any project
that you're working on. But here's the
key. Each one should have a specific
job. One of the most popular systems for
creating visual balance is called this
603010 rule. So 60% are your neutral
colors. Those are things like your
whites and your blacks. You use that for
your background and your text. 30% are
your secondary colors and you use those
for maybe different backgrounds or
cards, headers or visuals. And then
finally, the 10% is your accent colors.
And that's what you use if you want
something to really stand out like
buttons or CTAs. But that's all you need
really. As you get more confident with
color, you can expand your palettes, but
don't feel like you need to. Another tip
is use opacity rather than adding more
colors to your palette. So take your
primary color like this yellow here and
then just scroll down on the opacity to
create different color layers. This is
something that I actually learned when I
was looking through Google's material
design and notice that they used opacity
to create a lot of different color
variations. So one good color used well
beats five random colors any day. Next,
you want to prioritize contrast. And
this one's huge and it's one that a lot
of new designers miss. Your color combo
might look nice, but if your users can't
read it, it doesn't matter how pretty it
is. So, always check your color
contrast. Color contrast is the contrast
between your foreground text and the
background color that it sits on. And
and you can see here that passible
contrast is 3:1 on larger text and 4.5
to one on smaller text. Figma has a
contrast checker baked right into its
color system. All you got to do is
select the text that you want to check,
go to fill, and then there's a contrast
icon right in the top right hand corner.
It'll tell you whether or not it passes
or doesn't. It's a great tool. Finally,
don't build color palettes from scratch.
Most great color palettes weren't made
out of thin air. They were borrowed and
then refined. You can actually find any
site's color palette with a tool called
CSS overview. All you've got to do is go
to Chrome developer tools and then
select the three dot option right here
in the top right hand corner. Scroll
down, go to more tools, and then you'll
see CSS overview. Capture the overview
and it'll give you all the colors for
that specific site. It even gives you
fonts. It gives you size settings. It
gives you the type scale system. It's
such a great tool to use. Now, let's
talk code. And I know code, boo, hiss,
we don't need that anymore. But here's
the truth. If you want to be better than
99% of the other web designers out
there, you're going to need to at least
get comfortable with it. But you don't
need to know how to build a full web
app. You just need to know the basics
and then know how to use the right tools
to get you the rest of the way. Start
with the essentials, right? You've got
HTML for structure, CSS for style, then
there's JavaScript for interaction. And
if you're working with platforms like
WordPress, PHP basics can go a long way.
That alone is going to take you further
than most web designers would ever go. I
started with free courses on Code
Academy and then I would learn more as
projects that I worked on needed it. And
once you get the basics down, here's the
real trick. Find solutions that are
about 80% of the way there and then vibe
code the rest. So what do I mean by
that? Use code pens or snippets, even
chat GBT, right? whatever gets you close
and then you just tweak it until it does
what you want it to do. I had a friend
who's not a developer who customized
WordPress Woo Commerce plugin to have a
custom checkout process for his wife's
website. You don't need to be a full
stack developer. You just learn by
doing. Don't overthink it and use the
tools that are available to you. And
finally, the fifth skill to stand out as
the top 1% of all web designers,
conversion skills. Most designers design
for looks, but pro designers design for
action. Early in my career, I redesigned
a client's website from the ground up,
and it looked amazing, right? Way better
than the original. But here's the
problem. After we launched, their sales
plummeted. Why? Because I had focused so
much on the design that I ignored the
user journey. And that was a turning
point for me and a really hard lesson to
learn. So let's talk about what
conversion thinking really means. First,
every page needs to have just one goal,
right? That's it. And that goal should
be simple. You either want somebody to
buy a product, sign up for a phone call,
or get a lead magnet, and that's it. You
lose users when you're trying to do too
much at once. Second, you you need to
have clear strategic CTAs and they need
to be visible within seconds of someone
landing on the page. I like to include a
clear CTA in the hero section, one in
the navigation, and then one about every
two or 3 seconds as a user scroll down.
Third, it's about trust, clarity, and
maybe most importantly, feelings. You've
probably heard it said that people buy
from brands that they know, like, and
trust. But I like to take it one step
further. They need to know, like, trust,
and feel something from you. Your site
has to speak to real motivations,
clearly explain what they're getting,
and it needs to show them that they're
not alone. And that's where things like
testimonials and reviews and social
proof can really come in handy. So,
there you go. Those are the five skills
that separate beginner designers from
the top 1%. And if you're still trying
to learn absolutely everything, take
this as your permission to just stop.
Focus on these, right? Build around them
and you'll grow way faster than chasing
every single trend. Hey, I hope this
video was helpful. If it was, make sure
to hit that like button and subscribe so
you don't miss another episode that
we've got coming out. And hey, go design
something great. Don't forget, if you
don't quit, you